The first Monday of April 1625, the village of Meung, where
was born the author of the Roman de la Rose, seemed to be in a
revolution as complete as if the Huguenots had come
to do a second Rochelle. Several bourgeois, seeing run away
the women on the side of the Grande-Rue, hearing the children shouting
on the threshold of the doors, hastened to put on the armor and,
supporting their somewhat uncertain capacity of a musket or
of a pertuisane, went to the hospitality of the Franc
Meunier, in front of which was hastening, magnifying by minute in
minute, a compact group, noisy and full of curiosity.
At that time panics were frequent, and few days
passed without one town or the other recording on his
archives some event of this kind. There were the lords
who warred between them; there was the king who was doing the
war on the cardinal; there was the Spaniard who was waging war
King. Then, in addition to these secret or public wars, secret or
patents, there were still the thieves, the beggars, the
Huguenots, wolves and lackeys, who were waging war
everybody. The bourgeois always armed themselves against
robbers, against wolves, against lackeys, - often against
the lords and the Huguenots, sometimes against the King,
but never against the cardinal and the Spaniard. It resulted from
this habit taken, that, this aforesaid first Monday of the month of April
1625, the bourgeois, hearing noise, and seeing neither the handlebars
yellow and red, nor the livery of the Duc de Richelieu, rushed
on the side of the hotel Franc Meunier.
Once there, everyone could see and recognize the cause of this
rumor.
A young man ... - let's trace his portrait in a single stroke
feather: don Quixote Don Quixote at eighteen, don Quixote
embellished, without hauberk and without shorts, don Quixote coated
a woolen doublet whose blue color had been transformed
in an elusive shade of wine lees and heavenly azure.
Long brown face; cheekbone protruding cheek sign
astuteness; the enormously developed maxillary muscles, index
infallible to which one recognizes the Gascon, even without beret, and
our young man wore a beret adorned with a sort of feather;
the open and intelligent eye; crooked nose, but finely
drawn; Too big for a teenager, too small for a man
done, and that a little exercised eye would have taken for a farmer's son in
trip, without his long sword hanging from a skin belt,
beat his owner's calves when he was on foot, and
the hair bristling with his horse when he was riding.
Because our young man had a mount, and this mount was
even if remarkable, that it was noticed: it was a bidet of
Béarn, aged twelve or fourteen, yellow of dress, without hair
the tail, but not without javarts in the legs, and which, while
walking the head lower than the knees, which rendered useless
the application of the martingale, still made his eight
leagues a day. Unfortunately the qualities of this horse were
so well hidden under his strange hair and his incongruous look, that
at a time when everyone knew each other in horses,
the appearance of the aforesaid bidet in Meung, where he had entered there was
a quarter of an hour more or less by the Porte de Beaugency, produced
a sensation whose disfavor reflects back to its rider.
And this sensation was all the more painful to the young
D'Artagnan (so called the Don Quixote of this other
Rossinante), that he did not hide the ridiculous side that he
He gave such a good mount, as good a rider as he was; also
he had sighed deeply, accepting the gift that had been given him
M. d'Artagnan, father. He was not unaware that such a beast was worth
at least twenty books: it is true that the words of which the present
had been accompanied had no price.
"My son," said the gentleman Gascon - in this pure patois
of Béarn which Henry IV had never managed to get rid of -
my son, this horse was born in your father's house, there is
thirteen years, and has remained there since that time, which must
bring you to love him. Never sell it, let it die
quietly and honorably of old age, and if you do
campaign with him, spare him as you would an old man
servant. At the court, continued M. d'Artagnan father, if, however,
you have the honor to go, an honor to which, moreover, your
old nobility gives you rights, support your dignity
Gentleman's name, which was brought worthily by your ancestors
for more than five hundred years. For you and yours - by
yours, I hear your parents and your friends - can not stand
never anything but the cardinal and the king. It is by his
courage, do you understand, by his courage alone, that a
Gentleman is making his way today. Whoever trembles a
second perhaps lets escape the bait that during this
secondly, fortune was tending him. You are young, you
must be brave for two reasons: the first is that you
Gascon, and the second is that you are my son. Born
do not be afraid of opportunities and look for adventures. I have you
teaches how to handle the sword; you have an iron hock, a
wrist of steel; fight at all times; fight so much
more than duels are defended, and that, therefore, there is
twice the courage to fight. I do not have, my son, to give you
only fifteen crowns, my horse and the tips that you come
heard. Your mother will add the recipe for a certain balm
that she has a bohemian, and who has a miraculous virtue
to heal any injury that does not reach the heart. Make
your profit at all, and live happily and long. -- I
have only one word left to add, and this is an example that I
propose, not mine, because I have never appeared at court
and have only wars of religion in voluntary; I want
to speak of M. de Treville, who was my neighbor formerly, and who has
had the honor of playing any child with our thirteenth king Louis,
May God preserve! Sometimes their games degenerated into battle
and in these battles the king was not always the strongest.
The blows he received gave him great esteem and
of friendship for M. de Treville. Later, M. de Treville fought
against others in his first trip to Paris, five times; since
the death of the late king until the majority of the young
wars and sieges, seven times; and since that majority
until today, a hundred times maybe! - Also, despite the
edicts, ordinances and judgments, here he is captain of
musketeers, that is to say, chief of a legion of Caesars, whose
king makes a very great case, and that M. the cardinal dreads, he who
do not dread much, as everyone knows. Moreover,
M. de Treville earns ten thousand crowns a year; so it's a strong
nobleman. - He started like you, go see him with
this letter, and settle on him, to do as he did. "
Upon which, M. d'Artagnan, father, girded his son with his own sword.
kissed him tenderly on both cheeks and gave him his
blessing.
Leaving the paternal room, the young man found his mother
who was waiting for him with the famous recipe whose advice we
just reported had to require a fairly frequent job.
The farewells were on this side longer and more tender than they were
had been on the other, not that M. d'Artagnan loved his
son, who was his only offspring, but M. d'Artagnan was a
man, and he would have considered it unworthy of a man to let himself
go to his emotion, while Madame d'Artagnan was a woman and
more, was mother. - She cried profusely, and, let's say it to the
praise of M. d'Artagnan Jr., some efforts that he tried to
to remain firm as a future musketeer, nature
carried him away and he poured out tears, which he managed with great difficulty
to hide half.
The same day the young man set off, armed with the three
present paternal and which consisted, as we have said,
fifteen crowns, the horse and the letter for M. de Treville;
as we think, the advice was given over
the market.
With such a _vade-mecum_, d'Artagnan found himself, morally as
physically, an exact copy of the hero of Cervantes, to whom we
so happily compared when our historian's duties
made us a necessity to draw his portrait. Don Quixote
took the windmills for giants and sheep for
armies, d'Artagnan took each smile for an insult, and each
look for a provocation. As a result, he always had the
fist closed from Tarbes to Meung, and that one in the other
he put his hand to the pommel of his sword ten times a day;
but the fist did not come down on any jaw, and the sword
went out of his sheath. It's not just the view of
unfortunate yellow bidet flourished good smiles on them
faces of passers-by; but, as above the bidet was ringing a
sword of respectable size and above that sword shone
an eye rather fierce than proud, passersby repressed their
hilarity, or, if hilarity prevailed over caution, they
tried at least not to laugh on one side, as the
ancient masks. D'Artagnan thus remained majestic and intact
in his susceptibility to this unfortunate town of Meung.
But there, as he was coming down from his horse at the door of Franc Meunier
without anyone, host, boy or groom, having come to take
the stirrup to the mount, d'Artagnan warned at a half-open window of
ground floor a gentleman of good size and high mine,
although with a slightly scowling face, which caused with two
people who seemed to listen to him with deference. D'Artagnan
naturally, as was customary, believed to be the object of
conversation and listened. This time, D'Artagnan was mistaken
than half: it was not him that was in question, but
his horse. The gentleman seemed to list to his listeners
all its qualities, and as, as I said, the
listeners seemed to have a great deference to the
narrator, they burst out laughing at any moment. Now, as a
half smile was enough to awaken the irascibility of the young
man, we understand what effect it had on him so much noisy
hilarity.
D'Artagnan, however, first wanted to be aware of the
the countenance of the impertinent who made fun of him. He fixed his
look proud on the stranger and recognized a man of forty to
forty-five years old, with black and piercing eyes, pale complexion,
strongly accentuated nose, with a black mustache and perfectly
cut; he was dressed in a doublet and a breeches
purple with needles of the same color, without any ornament
than the usual punctures through which the shirt went. This high
de-chausses and this doublet, though new, appeared wrinkled
like long-lived traveling clothes enclosed in a
coat hanger. D'Artagnan made all these remarks with the speed
of the most careful observer, and no doubt by a feeling
instinctive who told him that this stranger had to have a great
influence on his life to come.
Now, as at the moment when D'Artagnan stared at the
a gentleman with a purple doublet, the gentleman was
the place of the béarnais bidet one of his most learned and his
deeper demonstrations, his two listeners burst
laughter, and he himself visibly, against his habit, wandered,
if you can talk like that, a pale smile on his face. This
time, there was no doubt, d'Artagnan was really
insult. Also, full of this conviction, he buried his beret
on his eyes, and, trying to copy some of the court tunes
that he had surprised in Gascony with lords traveling, he
stepped forward, one hand on the guard of his sword and the other leaning on
the
